Lumbini (pronounced [/lʊmˈbiːni/] , "the lovely" or "beautiful garden") is a Buddhist pilgrimage site in the Rupandehi District of Lumbini Province in Nepal. According to sacred texts and Buddhist commentaries, Queen Maya gave birth to Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha, in Lumbini, c. 563 BCE. Lumbini is one of four most sacred pilgrimage sites pivotal in the life of the Buddha.
Lumbini has a number of old temples, including the Mayadevi Temple, and several new temples funded by Buddhist organizations from various countries, a few of which are still under construction. Monuments, monasteries, stupas, a museum, and the Lumbini International Research Institute are also near to the holy site. There is a puskarini, or holy pond, where Mayadevi, the Buddha's mother, is believed to have taken ritual cleansing prior to his birth, and where he was first bathed. At other sites near Lumbini, earlier Buddhas were born, achieved ultimate Enlightenment and finally relinquished their earthly forms.
Lumbini was made a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1997.


In Buddha's time
In the time of the Buddha, Lumbini was situated east of Kapilavastu and south-west of Devadaha of Shakya, an oligarchic republic. According to the Buddhist tradition, it was there that the Buddha was born. The Ashoka Pillar of Lumbini, a monolithic column with a Brahmi script inscription discovered at Rupandehi in 1896, is believed to mark the spot of Ashoka's visit to Lumbini. The site was not known as Lumbini before the pillar was discovered. The translation of inscription (by Paranavitana) reads:

When King Devanampriya Priyadarsin had been anointed twenty years, he came himself and worshipped (this spot), because the Buddha Shakyamuni was born here. (He) both caused to be made a stone bearing a horse and caused a stone pillar to be set up, (in order to show) that the Blessed One was born here. (The King) made the village of Lumbini free of taxes, and paying (only) an eighth share (of the produce).

The park was previously known as Rupandehi, 2 mi (3.2 km) north of Bhagavanpura. The Sutta Nipáta (vs. 683) states that the Buddha was born in a village of the Sákyans in the Lumbineyya Janapada. The Buddha stayed in Lumbinívana during his visit to Devadaha and there preached the Devadaha Sutta.


Pillar of Ashoka

In 1896, former Nepalese Army General Khadga Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana and Alois Anton Führer discovered a great stone pillar at Rupandehi. They used crucial historical records made by the famous Chinese monk-pilgrims Faxian (early 5th century CE), and Xuanzang (7th century CE). A Brahmi inscription found on the pillar gives evidence that Ashoka, emperor of the Maurya Empire, visited Lumbini in the 3rd-century BCE and identified it as the birth-place of the Buddha.
At the top of the pillar, there is a second inscription by King Ripumalla (1234 Saka Era, 13-14th century CE):

Om mani padme hum! May Prince Ripu Malla be long victorious, 1234 
A second pillar of Ashoka is located about 22 kilometers to the northwest of Lumbini, the Nigali Sagar pillar (with inscription), and a third one 24 kilometers to the west, the Gotihawa pillar (without inscription).


Lumbini complex

Lumbini is 4.8 km (3 mi) in length and 1.6 km (1.0 mi) in width. The holy site is bordered by a large monastic zone in which only monasteries can be built: no shops, hotels or restaurants are permitted. The complex is separated into an eastern and western monastic zone, with the eastern having the Theravadin monasteries, and the western holding Mahayana and Vajrayana monasteries. There is a long water filled canal separating the western and eastern zones, with a series of brick arch bridges joining the two sides along the length. The canal is serviced by simple outboard motor boats at the north end which provides tours. The holy site of Lumbini has ruins of ancient monasteries, a sacred Bodhi tree, an ancient bathing pond, the Ashokan pillar and the Mayadevi Temple, a site traditionally considered to be the birthplace of the Buddha. From early morning to early evening, pilgrims from various countries perform chanting and meditation at the site.

Lumbini complex is divided into three areas: the Sacred Garden, the Monastic Zone and the Cultural Center and New Lumbini Village. The Sacred Garden remains the epicenter of the Lumbini area and consists of the birthplace of Buddha and other monuments of archaeological and spiritual importance such as the Mayadevi Temple, the Ashoka Pillar, the Marker Stone, the Nativity Sculpture, Puskarini Sacred Pond and other structural ruins of Buddhist stupas and viharas. The Monastic Zone, spanning an area of one square mile is divided into two zones: the East Monastic Zone which represents Theravada school of Buddhism and the West Monastic Zone which represents Mahayana and Vajrayana school of Buddhism, with their respective monasteries on the either side of a long pedestrian walkway and canal. Marking the monastic spot as a sacred pilgrimage site, many countries have established Buddhist stupas and monasteries in the monastic zone with their unique historical, cultural and spiritual designs. The Cultural Center and New Lumbini Village comprises Lumbini Museum, Lumbini International Research Institute, World Peace Pagoda of Japan, Lumbini Crane Sanctuary and other administrative offices. In 2021, The Government of Bangladesh signed an agreement to construct a Buddhist monastery in Lumbini under the chairmanship of former premier of Bangladesh Sheikh Hasina with an intention of keeping a "symbol of Bangladesh at the birthplace of Lord Gautam Buddha". Similarly, in 2023, Russian Ambassador to Nepal Aleksei Novikov laid the foundation for the Russian Buddhist monastery in Lumbini to represent Russian Federation as well.


Religious significance

Before parinirvana at the age of eighty, Gautama Buddha gave a sermon to his disciples on the significance of Lumbini as a place of pilgrimage (Dīghanikāya, 16; Mahāparinibbāṇa Sutta):

There are, O monks, four places on earth which a believing householder's son or a believing householder's daughter should commemorate as long as they live. Which are those four? –here the Venerable One has been born – here the Venerable One has attained the unsurpassable complete enlightenment – here the Venerable One has turned the threefold-turning, twelve-spoked lawful wheel – here the Venerable One has gone to the realm of complete nirvāṇa.
Along with Lumbini, which is the Buddha's place of birth, Bodh Gaya where he attained enlightenment, Sarnath where he gave his first sermon and Kushinagar where he attained parinirvana are the four most significant pilgrimage sites in Buddhism. These four places form a pilgrimage circuit along Buddha's Holy Sites.


Excavation at the Mayadevi Temple in 2013

New excavations in the Mayadevi temple in Lumbini in 2013 revealed a series of the most ancient Buddhist shrines in South Asia extending the history of the site to a much earlier date. According to Robin Coningham, excavations beneath existing brick structures at the Mayadevi Temple at Lumbini provide evidence for an older timber structure beneath the walls of a brick Buddhist shrine built during the Ashokan era (3rd-century BCE). The layout of the Ashokan shrine closely follows that of the earlier timber structure, which suggests a continuity of worship at the site. The pre-Mauryan timber structure appears to be an ancient tree shrine. Radiocarbon dating of charcoal from the wooden postholes and optically stimulated luminescence dating of elements in the soil suggests human activity began at Lumbini around 1000 BCE. The site, states Coningham, may be a Buddhist monument from 6th-century BCE. Other scholars state that the excavations revealed nothing that is Buddhist, and they only confirm that the site predates the Buddha.


Other developments

In 2013, Nepal's central bank introduced a 100-rupee Nepali note featuring Lumbini. The Nepal Rastra Bank said the new note would be accessible only during the Dashain, Nepal's major festival in September or October. It displays a portrait of Mayadevi in metallic silver on the front. The note also has a black dot on it to help visually impaired people recognise it. The name of the central bank is printed on the note in Roman script along with the date of printing in both the Gregorian calendar and the Bikrami calendar. The note was issued following a cabinet decision 27 August 2013.
Nipponzan Myohoji decided to build a Peace Pagoda in the park in 2001, which is visited by many different cultures and religions every day. Because some Hindus regard the Buddha as an incarnation of Vishnu, thousands of Hindus have begun to come here on pilgrimage during the full moon of the Nepali month of Baisakh (April–May) to worship Queen Mayadevi as Rupa Devi, the mother goddess of Lumbini. Lumbini was granted World Heritage status by UNESCO in 1997.
In 2011, Lumbini Development National Director Committee was formed under the leadership of Prime Minister Prachanda.The committee was given the authority to "draft a master plan to develop Lumbini as a peaceful and tourism area and table the proposal" and the responsibility to gather international support for the same.
In 2022 on Buddha's Birthday, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Nepalese Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba, jointly laid the foundation stone for the Indian monastery in Lumbini. Nepal-India cultural events are held annually in Lumbini highlighting the close spiritual and cultural connection between the two countries. António Guterres, secretary-general of the United Nations made a visit to Lumbini in October 2023 and "urged everyone to reflect on the core teachings of Buddhism and their relevance in today’s troubled world ", highlighting conflicts around the world from Middle East to Ukraine to Africa, undermining of global rules and their devastating impacts on ordinary people, especially women and children.
In 2026, the Government of Nepal began implementing the Greater Lumbini Area Development (GLAD) Project with financing from the World Bank. The project aims to develop the Greater Lumbini Area as a sustainable and inclusive cultural tourism destination while preserving its archaeological, religious and cultural heritage. The project covers four key locations: Lumbini, including the Sacred Garden and Maya Devi Temple conservation area, Tilaurakot, Ramgram and Devdaha.
The project was approved by the World Bank  in March 2026 with financing of US$85 million. In September 2026, the Government of Nepal, UNESCO, the Lumbini Development Trust and the World Bank jointly organized an International Conference on the Greater Lumbini Area. The conference brought together more than 150 participants and produced recommendations concerning heritage conservation, community participation, environmental protection and sustainable tourism.


Tourism
In 2019, Lumbini received 1.5 million tourists from around the world.


Transport
Lumbini is a 10-hour drive from Kathmandu and a 30-minute drive from Bhairahawa. The closest airport is Gautam Buddha Airport at Bhairahawa, with flights to and from Kathmandu.


Places to visit
Maya Devi Temple
World Peace Pagoda, Lumbini
Ashoka Pillar of Lumbini
Lumbini Crane Sanctuary


Hotels
An increase in international tourism in the 2010s combined with the development of Gautam Buddha International Airport have led to significant investment in the construction of hotels in and around Lumbini, with 80 new hotels being constructed in the region in 2017.


Sister cities
Lumbini has four official sister cities:

 Kushinagar, India (2022)
 Bodh Gaya, India
 Cáceres, Spain
 Kōya, Japan


See also
Bodh Gaya
Sarnath
Kushinagar
Maya Devi Temple, Lumbini
Lumbini Buddhist University
Lumbini Development Trust
Lumbini pillar inscription
Pillars of Ashoka
Ramagrama stupa
Kindo Baha
Pranidhipurna Mahavihar
Rajgir
World Peace Pagoda
List of stupas in Nepal
List of Buddhist monasteries in Nepal


Notes


References


Further reading
Lumbini - The birthplace of Lord Buddha in Nepal. Completing the Kenzo Tange master Plan. UNESCO.


Bibliography
Weise, Kai; et al. (2013), The Sacred Garden of Lumbini – Perceptions of Buddha's Birthplace (PDF), Paris: UNESCO, archived from the original (PDF) on 30 August 2014


External links

Lumbini On Trial: The Untold Story
 Lumbini travel guide from Wikivoyage
Lumbini at the Open Directory Project
Lumbini at WorldHeritageSite.org Listing